---
layout: post
title:  "Yelp ratings don’t reflect inspection grades, and restaurant owners aren’t happy"
date:   2020-12-12 18:50:00
categories: map
img: yelp.jpg
author: Margaret Kovick
categories: [one, two]
---


In 2016, writer Hana Nobel attempted to dine at five of San Francisco’s worst Yelp-rated restaurants. The experiment was cut short after Nobel got food poisoning at the fourth restaurant on the list. The buzz generated by Nobel’s [subsequent article](https://thebolditalic.com/i-visited-san-francisco-s-worst-rated-yelp-restaurants-and-got-food-poisoning-the-bold-italic-e326c6b1d47b), published by the Bold Italic, fed into an easy consumer conclusion: that low Yelp ratings correlate with unsanitary restaurant conditions. Jeremy Stoppelman, CEO of Yelp, reinforced this conclusion, [retweeting Nobel’s article, writing: “What happens when you eat at a number of restaurants with extremely low @yelp ratings? Bet you can guess…”](https://twitter.com/jeremys/status/634173246271676416) 

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">What happens when you eat at a number of restaurants with extremely low <a href="https://twitter.com/Yelp?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@yelp</a> ratings? Bet you can guess... <a href="http://t.co/kfYFzhJicn">http://t.co/kfYFzhJicn</a></p>&mdash; Jeremy Stoppelman (@jeremys) <a href="https://twitter.com/jeremys/status/634173246271676416?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">August 20, 2015</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script> 

The presumed correlation between low Yelp ratings and inspection grades has floated around in public thought for years, much to the dismay of restaurant owners. However, an analysis between public Yelp data and restaurant inspection grades in Maricopa County, Ariz., shows that there is no definitive correlation between low Yelp ratings and inspection grades. Average Yelp ratings are around 3.5 stars, regardless of inspection score.

 <div class="flourish-embed flourish-chart" data-src="visualisation/4582513"><script src="https://public.flourish.studio/resources/embed.js"></script></div>  

Average inspection scores are in the 90s (A grades) across Yelp star ratings. Restaurants with 1-star or 5-star Yelp ratings, the highest and lowest possible ratings, are outliers. Only 3 percent of Maricopa restaurants in the analysis have a 5-star Yelp rating, and only 2 percent have a 5-star rating. Eighty-six percent of restaurants are concentrated within the 2.5-star to 4.5-star range.

<div class="flourish-embed flourish-chart" data-src="visualisation/4606209"><script src="https://public.flourish.studio/resources/embed.js"></script></div> 

Nothing on Yelp’s platform offers a clear indication of cleanliness: not food cuisine tags, not zip codes, not even high Yelp ratings. Yelp users cannot use the forum to predict whether or not a restaurant is sanitary, yet, as Stoppelman’s Tweet demonstrates, the forum promotes the idea that they can.

<div class="flourish-embed flourish-chart" data-src="visualisation/4584568"><script src="https://public.flourish.studio/resources/embed.js"></script></div> 

<iframe title="Maricopa County Restaurant Averages by Zip Code" aria-label="chart" id="datawrapper-chart-hUSTw" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/hUSTw/2/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="938"></iframe>
<script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(a){if(void 0!==a.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var e in a.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.getElementById("datawrapper-chart-"+e)||document.querySelector("iframe[src*='"+e+"']");t&&(t.style.height=a.data["datawrapper-height"][e]+"px")}}))}();
</script> 

Nobel herself does not believe that Yelp ratings are generally indicative of bad sanitation. She concludes that most reviews usually focus on food quality and customer service, instead of sanitation practices. Though unfortunate, the results of Nobel’s experiment were not necessarily unexpected--she had compiled her list by searching Yelp for the keywords “worst” and “food poisoning.” She still doesn’t take Yelp reviews at face value, especially for indicating a restaurant’s sanitation level.

“Things have to be really bad for someone to notice and put that in a review--like cockroaches on the floor or pigeons in the restaurant,” She says. The latter Nobel experienced in Chinatown Restaurant during her experiment. She notes, “People don’t usually know what goes on in the kitchen.”

## The impact of Yelp ratings on restaurants

Restaurant owners are well-aware of the distance between Yelp ratings and inspection scores.

Rachel and Tim Lyons co-owned two high-end restaurants in Durham, NC: Primal Foods & Spirits and Blu Seafood and Bar. Both restaurants closed in 2018, but Rachel Lyons remembers the negative impact Yelp had on both businesses.

Before joining the restaurant business, the Lyonses heard that Yelp would prioritize a restaurant’s negative reviews unless the restaurant chose to advertise with them. Many businesses complained about this issue in the early 2010s and the topic garnered massive media attention. The website [www.yelp-sucks.com](https://yelp-sucks.com/tell-your-yelp-story/) was created for small business owners to voice their frustrations with the forum.

When Yelp reached out to the Lyonses with an advertisement opportunity for their restaurants, they declined. As a result, they noticed negative reviews populating the top of their Yelp page. The bigger problem, Rachel Lyons notes, is that many of the reviews were unfair, posted by customers who either didn’t give the restaurant a chance to redeem itself for a mistake, or did not understand upscale dining.

“Mistakes do happen,” Lyons says. “Unfortunately, people can go to Yelp and just write down a bad review without even giving that opportunity to make everything better.”

Blu was a small, locally-owned restaurant that sourced its seafood from high-quality sellers. Lyons says that a frequent problem was that customers would judge the restaurant by Red Lobster standards, and complain on Yelp. 

“[High-quality] ingredients cost more,” she says. “When someone would then write a review about the portion sizes being too small, that, just with their stars, brings our rating down.”

Additionally, Yelp does not have a system of verification that proves customers ate at a restaurant or used a business. Lyons remembers one example of a rival business owner leaving a fraudulent review on Primal’s Yelp page using a fake account. The Lyonses contacted Yelp in the hopes of having the review removed. They were unsuccessful. Though Primal is now closed, the fraudulent review is still on its Yelp page. Eleven Yelpers marked it as “useful.”

“It's really your word against the public,” Lyons says. “Someone who may not have even ever come to your restaurant but simply doesn’t like you for another reason can go online and make anything up and be published. And that hurts your business.”

## Preference-based reviews

On top of fraudulent and misplaced reviews, many Yelp reviews are preference-based. In Maricopa County, where around 24,000 businesses are listed on Yelp, the phrase “my preference” appears in 240 unique reviews, as does the phrase “for my taste.” Yelp only allows 240 results per keyword search, so the real figures are likely much higher.

After Yelper Aileen C. ate at Roaring Fork Restaurant in Maricopa County, she left a 3.5-star review. She wrote: “Disclaimer: I only went to the happy hour… Citrus Mojito: Eh. Not great. It wasn't citrus-y enough for me, but that may be just personal preference… Overall, it was fine but I do want to try it for regular dinner one night because I have had friends give Roaring Fork raving reviews.”

Lyons thinks that the Yelp Elite program might have something to do with preference-based reviews.

Yelp Elite is a program in which, after posting a high number of reviews and regularly engaging with other users on Yelp, a Yelper earns a special profile tag that labels them as “Elite.” Elite members are invited to exclusive events hosted by Yelp. Through Yelp Elite, Yelpers are rewarded for writing reviews when they may not have otherwise.

## Yelp’s health scores

Not long after Nobel’s article was published, Yelp started posting “health scores” on most restaurant pages, a practice that had previously only been instituted in a handful of cities. The health scores do not represent recent state or county grades, but rather an algorithmic average based on past scores and violations.

One problem with this system, Lyons notes, is that inspection violations don’t always represent cleanliness.

“People always think it's just about how clean your restaurant is,” she says, “but really it has a lot to do with where things are located. Sometimes, because these inspections are not known in advance, the inspector will just show up and you may be in the midst of receiving a shipment. You can be unfairly graded simply because you're just in the midst of putting things away.”

Restaurateurs often refer to inspection scores as a “snapshot” of time that does not represent their overall reputation.

In her Mercury News article [“What’s in a Number: Yelp’s New Health Scores Don’t Mean What You Think They Do,”](https://www.mercurynews.com/2018/08/09/yelps-new-health-scores-dont-mean-what-you-think-they-do/) writer Jessica Yadegaran unpacks the controversies surrounding Yelp’s health scores.

In the article, Yadegaran talks to Golden Gate Restaurant Association representative Gwyneth Borden. Borden reinforces the unreliable nature of inspection scores, saying, “The things you got in trouble for, you fix. You have a reinspection within one week. You have to live with the bad score.”

Yelp’s system, Borden concludes, is neither transparent nor fair. She notes that, in 2015, San Francisco businesses that were flagged for major violations lost business by an average of 15 percent. A [2018 study](https://blog.yelp.com/2018/03/study-low-hygiene-scores-yelp-lead-decrease-consumer-purchase-intent) promoted by Yelp found that Yelp’s health scores decrease traffic for businesses with low scores by 12 percent compared to businesses with high scores.

Lyons, Borden, and Nobel conclude that Yelp yields an unfair and unreliable power over businesses.   

## The problem with inspection data

For consumers who care about restaurant sanitation, state and county records may be as unreliable as Yelp’s health scores.

In Maricopa County, for example, receiving a public inspection grade is voluntary for restaurants.

Sanitarian Jaime Vinaras works for the Maricopa Health Department.

He describes that, while the Maricopa Health Department is responsible for the county’s mandatory inspections, restaurants choose whether or not they want their grades to be public. If not, their scores are published on the Maricopa Health Department website as “Not Participating.” Specific violations are not made public, but the count of violations and past A grades in the past three years are. The Maricopa Health Department has repeatedly asserted that this information is enough for members of the public to understand a restaurant’s overall safety level. 

“Nothing in state law in Arizona says that a restaurant has to have a grade,” says Vinaras. As a result, of the 24,000 Maricopa County restaurant inspections between Aug. 4, 2016, and July, 25, 2019, 44 percent were marked as “Not Participating.”

<div class="flourish-embed flourish-chart" data-src="visualisation/4583935"><script src="https://public.flourish.studio/resources/embed.js"></script></div>

According to Maricopa Health Department law, [restaurants are given the choice to have their inspection grades published prior to inspection](https://www.maricopa.gov/DocumentCenter/View/5861/Grade-Card-Guidance-Document-PDF?bidId=). Even though inspections occur randomly, when they do, restaurant owners can make educated guesses about their business’ sanitation. Perhaps unsurprisingly, of the 13,544 restaurant inspections with published grades, 82 percent were A grades.   

The incentive for a restaurant to choose public grading is to showcase cleanliness to customers, but some restaurants still receive imperfect grades. Out of the 24,000 inspections, 83 received D grades, 302 received C grades, and 2,073 received B grades.

Vinaras says that the Maricopa Health Department hasn’t seen any glaring trends of restaurants with low-inspection scores being concentrated in certain cuisine types or locations. He chose not to comment on the accuracy of Yelp’s health scores, but emphasized that the company’s system was different from that of the Maricopa Health Department.

 <iframe title="Maricopa County Average Household Income by Zip Code" aria-label="Map" id="datawrapper-chart-dVr6d" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/dVr6d/3/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="626"></iframe>
 <script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(a){if(void 0!==a.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var e in a.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.getElementById("datawrapper-chart-"+e)||document.querySelector("iframe[src*='"+e+"']");t&&(t.style.height=a.data["datawrapper-height"][e]+"px")}}))}();
</script>

<iframe title="Average Yelp Stars by Zip Code" aria-label="Map" id="datawrapper-chart-Q4ROg" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/Q4ROg/3/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="626"></iframe>
<script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(a){if(void 0!==a.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var e in a.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.getElementById("datawrapper-chart-"+e)||document.querySelector("iframe[src*='"+e+"']");t&&(t.style.height=a.data["datawrapper-height"][e]+"px")}}))}();
</script>

<iframe title="Maricopa County Average Inspection Grades by Zip Code" aria-label="Map" id="datawrapper-chart-T5S3a" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/T5S3a/3/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="640"></iframe>
<script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(a){if(void 0!==a.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var e in a.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.getElementById("datawrapper-chart-"+e)||document.querySelector("iframe[src*='"+e+"']");t&&(t.style.height=a.data["datawrapper-height"][e]+"px")}}))}();
</script>

The only clear external indicator of a restaurant’s cleanliness, he notes, is whether or not it has Active Managerial Control (AMC), a designated food safety management team. “Restaurants that have active food safety management have better control over food safety practices,” he says. 

There is no existing database of restaurants with safety management teams, and this information is not as accessible to the average consumer as, for example, a Yelp rating. 

Ironically, inspection grading systems like Maricopa’s are the reason for Yelp’s algorithmic health scores.

“There’s an incentive for health inspectors and restaurateurs to have esoteric language that keeps consumers out of the loop,” Luther Lowe, Yelp’s vice president for public policy, [told the Washington City Paper](https://washingtoncitypaper.com/article/184847/do-yelps-health-scores-accurately-capture-the-cleanliness-of-dc-restaurants/). “We’re trying to give them a seat at the table.”

 ## A world without Yelp

 In 2020, restaurateur Billy Godwin took over the Sunrise Cafe in Maricopa County after the original owners lost the business during the Covid-19 lockdown. Though the cafe has an added “New” in its name, the original Yelp page still exists, with corresponding contact information, hours of operation, and recent reviews.

 The restaurant has a 3-star rating, a relatively low score for the Maricopa area. When asked about Yelp’s impact on his business, Goodwin was surprised to learn the restaurant was even listed. He says online reviews aren’t something he plans to incorporate into the New Sunrise Cafe’s business model.

 “We’re a family-run business,” Godwin says. “You want to make everyone happy, but we focus on customers who walk through the door and the food we serve them.”

 Only a few months into its new ownership, business at the New Sunrise Cafe is booming.
 
 
 