---
layout: post
title: "Rats on the rise in NYC"
date: 2022-05-04 12:00:00
categories: final
img: BTceMwQ.jpg
author: Laura Laux
categories: [one]
---

Garbage piles feed them, subway stations house them, they're inescapable--they're everywhere. 
You descend the broken escalator that leads down to the churning New York City subways, glancing to the side to see a few fighting over a moldy slice of pizza. You shiver with disgust and quicken your pace. Next thing you know, one of them scurries across your path, you fight back a scream and think to yourself, _will I ever get used to this?_ 
To be completely honest…probably not.

Rats, garbage, and grime are all part of the metropolitan-package-deal; you really can't have one without the others. Knowing this, it's still important to combat the issue as best the city can. Rats are extremely common spreaders of dirt, bacteria, and diseases. Hundreds of years ago these  critters paved the way for the Bubonic Plague, and, if gone unchecked, could pave the way for more just like it.

During the height of the world's most recent wide-spread sickness, bats were a common
inhibitor, mosquitoes had a hand in malaria, and raccoons are notorious for giving your neighbor's dog rabibbies…rats are no less of a threat–especially in New York City.

[New York City's Open Data](https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Social-Services/311-Service-Requests-from-2010-to-Present/erm2-nwe9/data) recorded well over 300,000 rodent complaints reported via their available 311 service line from 2010 to 2022–unsurpringing seeing as ["roughly 2 million,"](https://www.nyrentownsell.com/blog/new-york-city-rat-issue/#:~:text=The%20Rat%20Population&text=Although%20there%20is%20no%20exact,million%20rats%20in%20the%20city.) rats exist within the city alone–New York City's rat population more than triples the current population of Staten Island alone. And the rat rates are only rising: from 2010 to 2020 there was a 24% increase in rat sightings.

<iframe title="Percent Change in Rats 2010-2021" aria-label="Map" id="datawrapper-chart-lh3Sy" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/lh3Sy/6/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="701"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>


<iframe title="Percent Change in Refuse Collection 2010-2021" aria-label="Map" id="datawrapper-chart-960QZ" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/960QZ/5/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="701"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>

Nearly every NYC community district saw an increase in rat complaints, the largest being from Manhattan, where rat matters doubled. There were about 350 rat complaints in Manhattan on average in 2010, meanwhile more than 800 rats were seen in Manhattan's in 2021– Manhattan single-handedly experienced a 130% increase in rats. 

During  COVID-19 pandemic many NYC citizens left the city while the case
 numbers continued to grow, and, as the humans fled–so did their trash. Sidewalk trash is essentially a five star meal to rats, (remember Remi's brother from _Ratatouille?_) The more hot garbage, the better. NYC's garbage tonnage has only seen increases over the past six years, directly correlating with the rat complaint increases.
 
 Once most citizens returned from the [COVID-19 pandemic "exodus"](https://abc7ny.com/nyc-exodus-census-fleeing-leaving/10949972/) the rats had all but taken over the city. Rats in Brooklyn had an  over 50% increase in sightings just from 2020 to 2021 alone. Conversely, there was a 40% increase in rat complaints filed overall in those two years as well. NYC rats managed to either double in population over the last two years, or cause the people of NYC to be more and more irritated by them.
 
  Tyler DiMarco, a 19-year-old Manhattan native, "can't go near a pile of garbage on the sidewalk without seeing a rat or two." She shares a story about her experiences living in NYC and growing used to its sewer citizens. She claims no New Yorker can use the subways–or most public transportation–without crossing paths with a rat or rodent. 
  
While the rats aren't always friendly neighbors, she says, "if they don't bother me, I'm not bothered. But sometimes they scurry around my feet, which I don't really want to see," summing it up to be a livable evil.


Katherine Harrison (22) feels a similar way. She lived three years in the Brooklyn borough and thinks it's normal to see "about 12 rats" on average per week. 

She agrees that dealing with rats and garbage is kind-of a "package deal" when visiting or living in a city, "it's something you sign up for," she says. Both when asked had interesting rat-related stories, each taking place near garbage or the subway. 

Though Brooklyn has both the highest rates of refuse tonnage collected on average per year (over 800,000 tons in 2021) and highest number of rat complaints out of the five NYC boroughs, the population of Brooklyn is the largest compared to the other four. So, which borough does have the worst rat problems?

<iframe title="Rat Sightings Since 2015" aria-label="Grouped Bars" id="datawrapper-chart-PKjy9" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/PKjy9/1/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="388"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>

Well, according to NYC Pest Control Specialist William "Billy" Swan, it's "the Bronx, for sure." Mr. Swan, who previously worked with NYC Sanitation Department, explained that "rats are a real issue in New York City," and their company can see up to 100 rodent-related exterminations per week. 

Interestingly enough, he said most rat and rodent issues are caused in "high-density" areas, such as subways, large apartment buildings, and construction areas. Though there is a clear correlation between rats and "fresh food" (what humans eat–commonly found in garbage), the question of rats boil down to "one primary answer: humans are slobs," says Mr. Swan sardonically. More hygienic living environments and lower waste rates would "knock the rodent population in half."

<iframe title="Lower refuse tonnage collected, more rats sighted" aria-label="Scatter Plot" id="datawrapper-chart-Ic4U6" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/Ic4U6/1/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="400"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>

Though, it's all easier said than done. 

The Assistant Commissioner for Public Affairs for the NYC Department of Sanitation (DSNY), Joshua Goodman, estimates there are "about 23,000 DSNY corner waste baskets on intersections around the City." Unfortunately, "they are placed in commercial or mixed-use zones, not fully residential areas," which means there are less available public waste containers in _high density areas_–more trash, more rats. 

 The DSNY is trying avidly to combat this issue by spreading the word on social media via their newly founded TikTok account. The NYC Sanitation TikTok account is run by Mr. Goodman's office, and features well over 50,000 subscribers, making it a "verified" account. "We want to reach New Yorkers where they are," says Goodman, "communicating their roles and responsibilities in keeping the city safe, healthy, and clean." 
 
Though they may come with every city, it's time rats started paying rent if they're going to camp out in America's cities and sewers. Ignoring the issue is certainly one way of dealing with it; however, that's only a temporary solution. What's best for our health, and the health of future city livers, is reducing the rat pandemic by all means possible.














