---
layout: post
title:  "Wage Gap Runs Rampant in the Garden State"
date: 2022-12-14 15:23:00
img: wages.png
author: Sanvi Bangalore
categories: [one]
---

It has been observed that men and women earn significantly different wages, even within similar industries and positions. New Jersey is no exception to this norm, as women on average earn only up to about 80% of what men earn across every county, if that. Industries that are female-dominated are most likely to pay lower wages overall than male-dominated ones. Additionally, female-dominated jobs also are less likely to include benefits like employer-provided health insurance and retirement plans compared to male-dominated occupations. Interestingly enough, even within female-dominated industries, women are paid less on average than men with the same job position. When comparing over 300 different occupations, there are zero where women have an earnings advantage over men, but many where men have significantly higher earnings than women. 

## The Wage Gap Throughout New Jersey
<iframe title="Women's Earnings as a Percentage of Men's by County" aria-label="Map" id="datawrapper-chart-AJyj3" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/AJyj3/1/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="border: none;" width="550" height="1156" data-external="1"></iframe>

It’s clear that the highest average amount a woman will make compared to a man’s dollar is still only 79 cents. The lowest average amount is women making 60 cents of a man’s dollar, which highlights a significant inequality in wages across the state. Within the state, there are no clear patterns of patches with more or less wage equality. Atlantic County has the least wage discrepancy, followed by Hudson and Union Counties which are tied for second and third place. Interestingly, the latter counties are located on the far northeast end of the state in contrast with Atlantic County. 

## New's Jersey's Most Inequitable County

In Salem County, New Jersey, women earn only 60% of what men earn, totaling a $21,000 difference every year. Salem County is New Jersey’s most rural county, known for its fine wildlife and open space, making it attractive to the agricultural industry and business developers. Currently, builders are working to cultivate the terrain for new businesses and industries to establish themselves. It’s reasonable to conclude that the agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, and mining industries are especially prevalent in Salem. These industries are also few of the many that see incredible wage discrepancies in the area; women only making 57% of what men earn. 

To understand why the wage gap hits Salem County so hard, I speak with Juni Reagan, a New Jersey agricultural worker from Middlesex County. “While the agricultural industry shows a large disparity, especially in Middlesex county where I’m from, it's most often because women tend to hold lower positions within companies, whereas men dominate the management positions. That’s not to say that there still isn’t inequity present, as it’s quite possible there are gendered differences even at the management level.”

It’s also important to consider what local politicians are doing to combat the wage gap, if anything. Congressman Jefferson Van Drew is a Republican who has represented NJ’s 2nd district for the past three years. The only gender-related legislation Van Drew has drafted is the “My Child, My Choice” Act. He said it would require parents to be “informed of any classroom discussion relating to gender identity and sexual orientation” and in reponse to the “radical” policies discussing gender education in schools. 
	
<iframe title="Percentage of NJ Residents who Supported Gov. Murphy in 2017" aria-label="Map" id="datawrapper-chart-0yzm8" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/0yzm8/1/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="border: none;" width="600" height="780" data-external="1"></iframe>

## New Jersey’s Attempt to Level the Playing Field

What has the state done to combat the wage gap? Much of the state’s significant progress has been initiated by Gov. Phil Murphy, who has served as New Jersey’s governor since January 2018. In April 2018, Murphy signed into law The Equal Pay Act, which strengthens protections against employment discrimination by promoting equal pay for all groups protected by the Law Against Discrimination (LAD). Murphy said, “We are sending a beacon far and wide to women across the Garden State and in America – the only factors to determine a worker’s wages should be intelligence, experience and capacity to do the job.  Pay equity will help us in building a stronger, fairer New Jersey.”

In his 2017 gubernatorial campaign, Murphy won against Republican candidate Kim Guadagno by significant margins, earning 56% of the vote, opposed to Guadagno’s 42%. There is a moderate correlation between counties with lower wage gaps and districts that predominantly voted for Murphy. Passaic, Union, Essex, and Hudson counties all have lower wage gaps compared to the rest of the state and those corresponding districts have the highest percentage of Murphy voters. Camden and Mercer county also had a majority of Murphy voters in 2017, and have lower wage gaps than most counties with a Guadagno majority. The outliers of this correlation are a few South Jersey counties, namely Cumberland, Cape May, and especially Atlantic County.

Katelyn Kazantsis, a female desk receptionist in Atlantic County said, “I wasn’t old enough to vote in the 2017 election, but I know most of my friends and family voted for Guadagno. They believed her policies like fixing pension and health benefits were more relevant than equal pay legislation. I somewhat agree, it’s more of the government’s job to prevent massive tax hikes which also affects our disposable income.”

<iframe title="What Percentage of a Man's Earnings Does a Woman Earn in NJ?" aria-label="Range Plot" id="datawrapper-chart-zlvC5" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/zlvC5/1/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="border: none;" width="600" height="623" data-external="1"></iframe>

Most industries have wide ranges between their counties with the highest and lowest percentage of women’s earnings compared to men’s. Management has noticeably the widest range, in which women from some counties earn only 21 cents of a man’s dollar, and in others they are earning almost four times as much. Atlantic County is the county with the 375% and its northern neighbor Ocean County is the 21%. But what could be the reason for two neighboring counties with immensely different wage gaps for the same industry? Padma Rao is a human resources manager for Mercedes Benz who frequently works in salary negotiations and posing job offers to potential employees. She says that the tourism industry is very prevalent in Atlantic County, as it includes Atlantic City, which is a hotspot destination for nightlife, casinos, and luxury shopping. Rao said she used to work for the Borgata in Atlantic City ten years ago, and worked on an entirely female-run team. “We were all making good money”, she says. “It was the highest I’ve ever made thus far in my career. While it was a good opportunity, the location and industry wasn’t my long-term plan.”

Rao, with her experience as an earner and determinant of people’s earnings, has comprehensive insight on the cause and effect of the wage gap. She says, “The differences in wages by gender are complicated to explain in just a few words. It’s a result of systemic differences in opportunities offered to each gender, which then impacts the type of positions women are motivated to seek out. There is sexism undeniably present in many industries, and while many companies are working to change that, it is still a work in progress.” 
Systemic issues aside, the question arises as to why companies are consciously paying higher wages to men for the same jobs. Rao accounts this to specific employer practices, which include using prior salary history to set current pay and prohibiting employees from discussing their wages. “It is always a good decision to discuss with your female and male employees alike what your wages are. While it may seem like an awkward discussion, it’s necessary. If it seems unfair after inquiring with your colleagues, the next step is to have a cordial discussion with your employer to rectify the situation.” While the wage gap is still a prevalent issue in the present, progress is being made in both the private and public sector. However, the group that is getting the short end of the stick, it may not be enough to wait for progress from outside entities. On an individual level, some level of initiative with salary negotiation could go a long way to combat gender inequality in wages.
