---
layout: post
title: "Government Failing to Combat Dangers of ‘Forever Chemicals’"
date:   2022-05-04 12:00:00
categories: final
img: pfas.png
author: William Burger
categories: [one]
---


In the township of Hellam, Pennsylvania just over 2000 people live close by to one of the most contaminated water sources in the country. Residents of New Hampshire live in the state with more contaminated sites per capita than 48 other states combined. And they’re all contaminated with the same chemical. 


PFAS is a group of over 12,000 man-made chemicals used in several industries for almost 80 years. Originally created by DuPont Chemicals and used in the Manhattan project, it became commercially available as Teflon. Since then, it has been used in manufacturing for medicine, packaging, cookware, firefighting, and textile production. 

Recently, multiple studies have found links between these chemicals  multiple types of cancer. The National Cancer Institute has run several studies each of which has found a link between PFAS and cancer. 

<iframe title="PFAS Policy by State" aria-label="Map" id="datawrapper-chart-3vi3V" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/3vi3V/2/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="border: none;" width="752" height="488" data-external="1"></iframe>

Despite the noted adverse health effects, there are no federal laws in place to combat the growing threat of PFAS in water. In 2016, the EPA released a health advisory placing the safe limit for PFAS at 70 parts per trillion. They lowered this figure to 0.02 in June, 2022. One part per trillion is the equivalent of one drop of water in the Lincoln Memorial Reflection Pool.

Although this number is low, it is unenforced. The EPA has yet to propose any maximum contaminant level (MCL) at the federal level. In the absence of federal guidelines, only a handful of states have passed MCLs for their water, each of which is above the EPAs recommended guidelines. 

While these bills wait to pass, PFAS is already doing damage to communities across the country. 

Ted Evgeniadis is the Executive Director of the Lower Susquehanna Riverkeepr Association, a non-profit organization committed to maintaining the ecological health of Lower Susquehanna River Watershed and the Chesapeake Bay. Kreutz Creek is a tributary of the Susquehanna River that is under their care. 

The Waterkeeper Alliance published a report in October, 2022 identifying the most highly contaminated waterbodies in the nation. Kreutz Creek was at the top of the list. The PFOA levels were 200,000 times higher than the EPAs advisory guidelines.

Evgeniadis has traced the contamination to Republic Services' Modern Landfill.

"Groundwater concerns have prompted us to perform PFAS testing of local residents’ wells," says Evgeniadis, "I used Kreutz Creek and the known discharges of PFAS from the landfill as my monitoring location. So far, all the wells have tested positive for PFAS."

In response, Evgeniadis has threated legal action against the landfill.

Says Evgeniadis: "Modern Landfill has been violating the Clean Water Act for far too long. York County deserves better as the landfill has taken away the constitutional right for local residents and the public to safely recreate and fish around Kreutz Creek. The owners of the Landfill must be held accountable to the highest standards in effectively treating their wastewater and pay appropriate fines for violating the law."

Representatives from Republic Services' Modern Landfill did not respond to a request for comment.

<iframe title="Contaminated Sites Per Capita" aria-label="Bar Chart" id="datawrapper-chart-gjoGo" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/gjoGo/1/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="border: none;" width="600" height="1285" data-external="1"></iframe>

Fortunately, the three states witht the highest number of contaminated are three of the seven states with enforced MCLs. These MCLs are still much higher than the EPAs guidelines. New Hampshire's MCL for PFOA is 12 parts per trillion and Vermont's is 20.

In contrast to the near-zero advisory from the EPA, the WHO published a draft guideline in September, 2022 proposing drinking water limits at 100 parts per trillion. This draft was met with backlash from several scientists. (https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2022/nov/19/pfas-world-health-organization-who-drinking-water)

“I don’t really know how they could possibly put that out as something that is remotely safe for health,” says Frank Cassou, CEO of Cyclopure - a company that developed an environmentally friendly form of decontamination. “What the EPA is saying is you don't want those PFOA and PFOS consumed over a lifetime. So you can see how radically different the WHO values are compared to that.”

Cassou has praised the EPA for their action and believes they will be effective in combatting the unhealth of American water. He is less optimistic about Congress.

While multiple states have passed legislation to protect their citizens, the House of Representatives and Senate have yet to take any definitive action on the issue.

"The thing that happens that's different between Congress and the EPA is that the EPA can make rules. They have the authority under the Clean Water Act to do it," says Cassou, "The House may want to move faster."

Cassou does believe a federal MCL from the EPA is inevitable in some form. When that happens, his company is perfectly positioned to assist.

Cyclopure's main product, DEXSORB, has made waves in the scientific community with its cost-effective and energy efficient filtration. Compared to the current industry standard - activated carbon - DEXSORB has almost no carbon footprint or environmental consequences.

"We're very excited about our media," says Cassou.










