---
layout: post
title: "How did Georgia turn into a purple state?"
date: 2022-12-14 12:00:00
categories: final
img: IMG_5819.jpeg
author: Genesis Kidd
categories: [one]
---

nesis Kidd*

Voting has been a critical part of American history since the start of the country. It is important that every person, who is eligible to vote, to go out and vote. In the original constitution, only white men over the age of 21 were allowed to vote, so minorities did not have a say in how the country was run. Today, laws have been put into place to prohibit discrimination in any form. Citizens can vote at the age of 18 with proper registration. In most states, there is nondiscrimination on this basis of sex, sexuality, or race. The south has implemented laws that are rooted in Jim Crow that are still used today. Georgia has some of the strictest laws that prevent some minorities from voting and registering to vote. Due to this, minorities have made an immense effort to vote, and election outcomes have begun to change. As the years progress, states are starting to change the target of their voting. Georgia is a predominately red state, but in recent elections, it has become purple. In recent years, elections have been extremely tight causing numerous run-off elections. So why is this? 

# Demographics
 In the state of Georgia, the demographics of voters have a huge impact on how they vote. Most Georgia voters, like many other Americans, vote based upon either their party affiliation or how they are doing economically and socially. According to the Secretary of StateÕs office, there are 7,004,034 active voters as of December of 2021. 3.2 million identify themselves as male and 3.7 million identify themselves as women and 15,556 are unknown. Most voters, 1.4 million, come from residents of the age of 65 and older, and 18-24 years of age land in second place with 821,029. In counting race, 3.7 million active citizen voters identify themselves as white or not of Hispanic origin. 2 million active citizen voters identify themselves as Black not of Hispanic origins. Active citizens that identify as Hispanic, Asian Pacific Islander, American Indian or Alaskan, unknown and all others make up 1.2 million of the active voters. With this being said, minorities make up a significant part of Georgia voters, so it is imperative that their voice is being heard.
 
 <div class="flourish-embed flourish-chart" data-src="visualisation/12172862"><script src="https://public.flourish.studio/resources/embed.js"></script></div>
 
 Simi Awujo has been a Georgia resident her entire life. While in college in California, she requests absentee ballots for each election, because she understands the importance of her vote as a minority. 
 
ÒAs a Black woman, it is essential for me to vote because it is my right to use my voice to elect someone who would represent my values and work towards better living environment for me and others who look like me,Ó Awujo said.

# Senate Run-Off Elections
In recent years, Georgia has been known for its tight elections due to Fulton and surrounding counties having been consistently blue while the rest of the state is red. In todayÕs Georgia politics, votersÕ turnout in early voting which happens throughout the weekend with long lines which they can stand in for more than three hours. In the past two senate elections that Georgia has had, both had led into run-off elections because the count was too close to call. More than 1.8 million residents have voted early in the 2022 Georgia Run-off.  In certain counties like Fulton and DeKalb County, if most of the residents turn out to vote then the election could sway in a whole another way than election pundits would not have guessed. There are laws that limit the accessibility to vote but it doesnÕt stop Georgia voters from coming out and making their voices heard. 3.5 million Georgia residents either voted for Senator Raphael Warnock or Herschel Walker. Though the count was still very close, Senator Warnock pulled off the win. Residents of Georgia, from all over the country were very energized and enthusiastic about the election. Politically figures descended in Georgia, a notable one being Former President Barack Obama, to help campaign for Raphael Warnock. While Republican senator Lindsey Graham made an appearance at Herschel WalkerÕs campaign rally and spoke. People of fame who lived in Georgia like Former Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms were posting about them either early voting or just voting in general and emphasizing the encouragement of people to vote and being involved in their civic duty. College students were sending in their mail-in ballots or going down to Georgia to make sure to get their votes in. Many other people, like myself, voted during early voting over Thanksgiving break with my family. 

<div class="flourish-embed flourish-chart" data-src="visualisation/12186720"><script src="https://public.flourish.studio/resources/embed.js"></script></div>

Tyler Brown-Dewese is an advocate for voting rights, and making sure that everyone's voice is being heard. He understands the importance of getting everyone who is eligible to vote, to vote, especially in states like Georgia.

ÒNow more than ever is it important for Georgians to vote, because for a second time in a row, the second U.S. Senate seat for Georgia has been close and has been called into a runoff. The vote is the most powerful tool Americans must control their government and make sure they have authority over what happens in the halls of power that govern,Ó Brown-Dewese said.

<iframe title="Senate Run-Off Turn Out" aria-label="Multiple Pies" id="datawrapper-chart-Dn6uw" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/Dn6uw/1/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="239" data-external="1"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>

# Georgia Voter History 
Historically, Georgia has always been a red state and picks solely the Republican Party. The last time Georgia went blue in a Presidential Election was back in 1992, when then-Governor Bill Clinton beat the incumbent President George H.W. Bush Sr. But the 2020 election changed the course of history that many did not believe would/could have happened. No one believed that a Democrat, especially in the era of the Donald Trump Republican Party, that the state of Georgia would turn purple by going blue. Then Former Vice President Joe Biden, had won the state after a couple of days of poll workers counting mail-in ballots that held not just the results in Georgia up, but other states too, like Nevada, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, and Arizona. The state turned completely blue, apart from the governorÕs race in 2018, with Democratic senators and a Democratic president winning these hotly contested seats.

Mayana Silas, an advisor at Georgia State University, has been a Georgia resident for almost 20 years. She seen crutial Georgia elections, and votes based on what is best for her family. 

ÒI vote depending on how my life is and if my family and I are doing ok economically. I need to feel secure in my economics. Most people choose a party and stick to it, but I look at each candidate and decide who to vote for based on my family,Ó Silas said. 

<iframe title="Georgia Voter Turnout" aria-label="Map" id="datawrapper-chart-F61Yj" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/F61Yj/1/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="754" data-external="1"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>

Georgia is a state with interesting and complex politics. With its capital, Atlanta being some of the deciding factors for most elections, Georgia could become blue in many future elections. Again, the tricky part is the surrounding counties, and its strong southern history. It is imperative that people continue to fight for their rights to vote and continue to go out to vote. Each vote is important, and with elections being so close, it could change the entire outcome of the election. 






