---
layout: post
title: "Who drafted their team better, The Capitals or The Penguins"
date:   2022-12-14 12:00:00
img: whoisbetter.png
author: Federica Turina Dellamaggiore
categories: [Hockey]
---

The **Washington Capitals** spent almost 10% of its budget on its top 3 players while the
**Pittsburg Penguins** spent nearly 2% of theirs. For the Penguins, its top 3 players summed up an amount of 236 points while the Capitals’ top 3 beat them by only two more points. Alex Ovechkin was the player with the most points constituting nearly 38% of the Washington Capitals’ points. 

As you might know, the Washington Capitals count with one of the best players in the history of the NHL, **Alex Ovechkin**. For the 2021-2022 season, Alex accumulated a crazy amount of 90 points, scoring a total of 50 goals and 40 assists. He can be considered one of the best-paid players in the NHL, with a cap salary of almost 10 million dollars. His salary takes an average of 7% of the Capitals’ budget, which is almost 82.5 million dollars. “Alex Ovechkin is definitely still a good asset”, data and visual journalist **Alvin Chang** stated.  “He will still be in the team for another five years; however, he can't be your best player if you want to be a champion”, he concluded. With this analysis, we can say that maybe the Washington Capitals are spending a lot of money on a player that won't make them earn the ultimate title.

<div class="flourish-embed flourish-scatter" data-src="visualisation/12094693"><script src="https://public.flourish.studio/resources/embed.js"></script></div> 

On the other hand, the Capitals still have really good players such as **Evgeny Kuznetsov** and **John Carlson**. However, even though they are great players, they are 12 and 19 points away from Ovechkin. Alex has scored 50 goals while Kuznetsov and Carlson have not even half of it. They both have salaries above 2 million dollars and they both together take at least 9% of the Capitals’ budget. There is a huge gap between the leading player and the ones following him, so, are the Capitals taking advantage of their resources?. 

“If we go back to 15 or 10 years ago, the Capitals drafted Ovechkin and some other guys that were good values later down the line, doing a really good job drafting”, Chang confirmed. So, even though the Capitals are spending larger amounts of money on these players, in the long run, they were good assets for the team and gave the Capitals big successes against the Penguins. In 2008–09 the Capitals finished as the second-best team in the Eastern Conference, while the Penguins finished as the fourth. All three of the League's three leading scorers during the regular season played for either Washington or Pittsburgh (Evgeni Malkin, 113 points; Alexander Ovechkin, 110 points; Sidney Crosby, 103 points).

The Penguins, on the other hand, also count with one of the many legends of the NHL, **Sidney Crosby**. Crosby accumulated a total of 84 points, scoring 31 goals and getting 53 assists. He is the leading on points of his team, followed by **Jake Guentzel**. Crosby’s salary is nearly 9 million dollars, taking 11% of the Penguin's Budget while Guentzel takes only 7% of it.  

When looking at the stats, it looks like the Penguins are spending less money on their players but getting way better results than the Capitals are. The penguin’s top 3 players accumulated a total of 236 points. What is relevant here is that two out of the three players have 84 points each, and the third one is only 16 points away. This means the Penguins’ top 2 players constitute nearly 36% of its total points each. When compared to the Capitals, Alex Ovechkin by himself constitutes almost 38% of his team’s points so that means the Penguins drafted better than them, getting not one, but two players that are able to get many points. In simple words, the Washington Capitals only have one effective player while the Penguins have two that are capable of earning a good number of points for their teams. 

<div class="flourish-embed flourish-chart" data-src="visualisation/12095589"><script src="https://public.flourish.studio/resources/embed.js"></script></div> 

However, former Vox’s data reporter Alvin Chang has a different point of view about it. “The penguins did a decent job drafting in the last couple of years. They got lucky and got Sidney Crosby” he stated. However, what he said about Crosby, maybe the reason why the Penguins are doing better than the Capitals. “He is still one of the best players who ever played in the NHL. He has performed at a higher level now and if you have him on your team, you can make a run with him. He is taking more than 10% of their cap too and I believe that when you do that, you must do it with someone like Sidney Crosby”. 

In terms of money, statistics show that the Penguins are taking better advantage of their resources. Even though Crosby and Ovechkin both take almost 10% of their team’s budget and the Penguins player has fewer points, the difference is not really big, and the Penguins have not one, but two players that are only six points away from the Capitals’ star. 

<div class="flourish-embed flourish-chart" data-src="visualisation/12045593"><script src="https://public.flourish.studio/resources/embed.js"></script></div>  

The Penguins have shown that they are smarter when using their resources, drafting players that can lead the team to important titles, and leaving them higher than the Capitals for the 2021-2022 season with a difference of 14 points, the Penguins ending up being third and the Capitals sixth in the Metropolitan division of the NHL. So, in your opinion, who drafted their team better: The Capitals or The Penguins? 







